.TH VLS 1 "June 18, 2025" "vls 0.1" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
vls \- colorized ls replacement
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vls
.RI [ OPTION ]... [ FILE ]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B vls
is a minimal utility that lists directory contents similarly to
.BR ls (1).
File names are colorized by default. The option
.BR --color=WHEN
controls coloring where WHEN is \fIauto\fP, \fIalways\fP or \fInever\fP.
Default behavior is to display information about symbolic links. Use
.BR -L
to follow them or
.BR -H
for command line paths only.
The
.BR -Z
option prints SELinux contexts when available and is only meaningful on Linux.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR -a
Include directory entries whose names begin with a dot (.).
.TP
.BR -A , --almost-all
List all entries except "." and "..".
.TP
.BR -l
Use a long listing format.
.TP
.BR -i
Print the inode number of each file.
.TP
.BR -t
Sort by modification time, newest first.
.TP
.BR -u
Sort by access time, newest first. When combined with
.BR -l ,
display access time instead of modification time.
.TP
.BR -c
Sort by status change time, newest first. When combined with
.BR -l ,
display change time instead of modification time.
.TP
.BR -S
Sort by file size, largest first.
.TP
.BR -X
Sort by file extension, case-insensitive.
.TP
.BR -v
Sort by version (numbers in names are compared numerically).
.TP
.B --sort=\fIWORD\fP
Sort according to WORD: \fBsize\fP, \fBtime\fP, \fBatime\fP, \fBctime\fP,
\fBextension\fP, \fBversion\fP or \fBnone\fP.
.TP
.BR -f , -U
Do not sort; list entries in directory order.
.TP
.BR --group-directories-first
List directories before other files.
.TP
.BR --time-style=\fIFMT\fP
Format times using strftime(3) format FMT.
.TP
.BR --full-time
Use the predefined format \fB%F %T %z\fP for timestamps.
.TP
.B --time=\fIWORD\fP
Display the specified timestamp field. WORD may be
\fBmod\fP (default), \fBaccess\fP, \fBuse\fP or \fBstatus\fP.
.TP
.BR -r
Reverse the sort order.
.TP
.BR -R
List subdirectories recursively (symbolic links are not followed).
.TP
.BR -d
List directory arguments themselves instead of their contents.
.TP
.BR -L
Follow symbolic links when retrieving file details.
.TP
.BR -H
Follow symbolic links specified on the command line.
.TP
.BR -Z
Print SELinux context before the file name (Linux only).
.TP
.BR -F
Append indicator characters to entries: '/' for directories, '*' for executables and '@' for symbolic links.
.TP
.BR -p
Append '/' to directory names.
.TP
.B --file-type
Like -p but ignore other indicators unless -F is given.
.TP
.B --indicator-style=STYLE
Choose indicator style: none, slash, file-type or classify.
.TP
.BR -s
Display the number of blocks allocated to each file.
.br
When used with
.B -l
or
.B -s,
a line of the form
.B "total <num>"
appears before the listing showing the sum of blocks for the displayed files
according to the current block size.
.TP
.BR --block-size=SIZE
Override the default block size (512 or 1024 bytes).
.TP
.BR -k
Use 1 KiB blocks for size calculations.
.TP
.BR -h
With
.BR -l ,
print sizes in human readable format.
.TP
.BR -n
Display numeric user and group IDs in long format output.
.TP
.BR -g
Omit the owner column in long format output.
.TP
.BR -o
Omit the group column in long format output.
.TP
.BR -B , --ignore-backups
Do not list files ending with '~'.
.TP
.BR -I " PATTERN" , --ignore=PATTERN
Do not list entries matching the shell PATTERN. May be repeated.
.TP
.B --hide=PATTERN
Hide entries matching PATTERN unless -a or -A is used. May be repeated.
.TP
.BR -C
List entries vertically in columns (default for terminals).
.TP
.BR -x
List entries across columns instead of vertically.
.TP
.BR -m
Print entries separated by ", " wrapping lines to terminal width.
.TP
.BR -Q , --quote-name
Use C-style quoting for file names.
.TP
.BR -b
Use backslash escapes for non-printable characters.
.TP
.BR --quoting-style=\fISTYLE\fR
Select quoting style. STYLE is \fIliteral\fR, \fIc\fR or \fIescape\fR.
.TP
.BR -1
List one entry per line.
.TP
.BR --color=WHEN
Control colorization. WHEN is \fIauto\fP, \fIalways\fP or \fInever\fP.
.TP
.BR --help
Display a brief usage message and exit.
.TP
.BR -V , --version
Display the program version and exit.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B vls
List the contents of the current directory.
.TP
.B vls -al
List all files in long format.
.TP
.B vls -tR /etc
Recursively list /etc sorted by modification time.
.TP
.B vls --color=never
List current directory without colorization.
.TP
.B vls -I '*.o'
Ignore files ending in .o
.TP
.B vls -b
Escape non-printable characters with backslash codes
.TP
.B vls --indicator-style=classify
Append indicator characters to entries
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ls (1)
